Considerations for Stateful Workloads Feedback (#19430)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/docs/operations/stateful-workloads.mdx

| [Persistent Disk](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks)     | [Zonal or regional](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks#repds) block devices attached to one or sometimes more instances | Strongly persistent, with an independent lifecycle                               | [Configurable](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/performance) | General purpose persistent storage                                                                                           | via the CSI plugin or static `host_volume` |
| [Filestore](https://cloud.google.com/filestore)                    | Zonal/Regional file storage that can be available to multiple instances                                           | Strongly persistent, with an independent lifecycle                               | [Configurable](https://cloud.google.com/filestore/docs/performance)     | File storage that needs to be available to multiple VMs in multiple zones (even only as a failover)                          | via the CSI plugin or static `host_volume` |

### Private cloud or on-premises

> When running workloads on-premises in a self-managed private cloud, SAN/NAS systems or Software Defined Storage like Portworx or Ceph are usually used to provide non-local storage. Compute instances can access the storage using a block protocol such as iSCSI, FC, NVMe-oF, or a file protocol such as NFS, CIFS, or sometimes both. Dedicated storage teams manage these systems in most organizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running workloads on-premises in a self-managed private cloud, SAN/NAS systems or Software Defined Storage like Portworx or Ceph usually provide non-local storage. Compute instances can access the storage using a block protocol such as iSCSI, FC, NVMe-oF, or a file protocol such as NFS, CIFS, or sometimes both. Dedicated storage teams manage these systems in most organizations.
```

Is this still accurate? For active voice.

> ## Consuming Persistent storage from Nomad

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Consuming persistent storage from Nomad
```

Reviewer: This is for sentence case

Find a list of plugins and their feature set in the [Kubernetes CSI Developer Documentation](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html).

While Nomad follows the CSI specification, some plugins may implement orchestrator-specific logic that makes them incompatible with Nomad. You should validate that your chosen plugin works with Nomad before using it. Refer to the plugin documentation from the storage provider for more information.

There are three CSI plugin subtypes:

- **Controller**: Communicates with the storage provider to manage the volume lifecycle.
	- **Node**: Runs on all Nomad clients and handles all local operations (for example, mounting/unmounting volumes in allocations). The node must be `privileged` to perform those operations.
	- **Monolithic**: Combines both the above roles.

All types can and should be run as Nomad jobs - `system` jobs for Node and Monolithic, `service` for Controllers. More information can be found on the CSI concepts [documentation page](/nomad/docs/concepts/plugins/csi).

> CSI plugins are useful when storage requirements are quickly and constantly evolving due to their dynamic nature - for instance new workloads needing persistent storage being added or removed frequently. However, they present some challenges in terms of maintenance - most notably, they need to run constantly, be configured (including authentication and connectivity to the storage platform), and updated to keep track with new features and bug fixes and keep compatibility with the underlying storage platform. They also introduce a couple of moving parts, can be difficult to troubleshoot and have a complex security profile (due to needing to run as `priviledged` containers in order to be able to mount volumes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSI plugins are useful when storage requirements are quickly and constantly evolving due to their dynamic nature - for instance, new workloads that frequently need persistent storage added or removed. However, they present some challenges in terms of maintenance - most notably, they need to run constantly, be configured (including authentication and connectivity to the storage platform), and updated to keep track with new features and bug fixes and keep compatibility with the underlying storage platform. They also introduce a couple of moving parts, can be difficult to troubleshoot, and have a complex security profile (due to needing to run as `privileged` containers in order to be able to mount volumes).
```

The [Stateful Workloads with CSI tutorial](/nomad/tutorials/stateful-workloads/stateful-workloads-csi-volumes) and the [Nomad CSI demo repository](https://github.com/hashicorp/nomad/tree/main/demo/csi) offer guidance and examples on how to use CSI plugins with Nomad and include job files for running the plugins and configuration files for creating and consuming volumes.

### Host volumes

> Host volumes mount paths from the host (the Nomad client) into allocations. Nomad is aware of host volume availability and makes use of it for job scheduling. However, Nomad does not know about the volume's underlying characteristics, such as if it is a standard folder on a local ext4 filesystem, backed by a distributed networked storage such as GlusterFS, or a mounted NFS/CIFS volume from a NAS or a public cloud service such as AWS EFS. Therefore they can be used both for local somewhat persistent storage and for highly persistent networked storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Host volumes mount paths from the host (the Nomad client) into allocations. Nomad is aware of host volume availability and makes use of it for job scheduling. However, Nomad does not know about the volume's underlying characteristics, such as if it is a standard folder on a local ext4 filesystem, backed by a distributed networked storage such as GlusterFS, or a mounted NFS/CIFS volume from a NAS or a public cloud service such as AWS EFS. Therefore you can use host volumes for both local somewhat persistent storage and for highly persistent networked storage.
```

> Because you need to declare host volumes in the Nomad agent's configuration file, you have to restart the Nomad client to reconfigure them. This makes host volumes impractical if you need to change your storage configuration frequently. Furthermore, it might require coordination between different [personnas](/nomad/docs/concepts/security#personas) to configure and consume host volumes, for instance a Nomad Administrator to modify Nomad's configuration file to add/update/remove host volumes to make them available for consumption by Nomad Operators. Also, in the case of networked host volumes, a Storage Administrator might need to provision the volumes and make them available to the Nomad clients, and a System Administrator might need to mount them on the Nomad clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because you need to declare host volumes in the Nomad agent's configuration file, you have to restart the Nomad client to reconfigure them. This makes host volumes impractical if you need to change your storage configuration frequently. Furthermore, it might require coordination between different [personas](/nomad/docs/concepts/security#personas) to configure and consume host volumes, for instance a Nomad Administrator to modify Nomad's configuration file to add/update/remove host volumes to make them available for consumption by Nomad Operators. Also, in the case of networked host volumes, a Storage Administrator might need to provision the volumes and make them available to the Nomad clients, and a System Administrator might need to mount them on the Nomad clients.
```

> Host volumes backed by local storage help persist data that is not critical, for example an on-disk cache that can be rebuilt if needed. When backed by networked storage such as NFS/CIFS-mounted volumes or distributed storage via GlusterFS/Ceph, host volumes provide a quick and easy option to consume highly available and reliable storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Host volumes backed by local storage help persist data that is not critical, for example an on-disk cache that can be rebuilt if needed. When backed by networked storage such as NFS/CIFS-mounted volumes or distributed storage via GlusterFS/Ceph, host volumes provide a quick option to consume highly available and reliable storage.
```
We don't use the term 'easy'
